README.md, before:

# The "Office Apocalypse" Algorithm: Predicting Commercial Real Estate Vacancy Risk in NYC

## 1. Project Overview
This repository contains the complete codebase and documentation for the **"Office Apocalypse" Algorithm**, a capstone project for the **CS668 Analytics course at Pace University**.

The goal is to develop a **machine learning model** to predict long-term vacancy risk for commercial office buildings in **New York City**, leveraging a diverse set of **public and alternative datasets**.

---

## 2. Problem Statement
The **COVID-19 pandemic** has fundamentally altered workplace culture, popularizing remote and hybrid models that reduce demand for traditional office space.

This shift threatens to create a **commercial vacancy crisis** in NYC, impacting:
- **Property values & tax revenue**
- **Small business viability**
- **Neighborhood vitality**

This project aims to create a **predictive tool** to identify which properties are most at risk of prolonged vacancy (≥12 months), providing **actionable insights** for:
- City planners → conversion and zoning strategies
- Investors & developers → early detection of distressed assets
- Small businesses → anticipating changes in foot traffic

---

## 3. Repository Structure
```
office-apocalypse-algorithm/
├── data/
│   ├── raw/                # Raw, immutable datasets
│   └── processed/          # Cleaned, feature-engineered datasets
│
├── notebooks/
│   ├── 01_data_acquisition.ipynb
│   ├── 02_exploratory_data_analysis.ipynb
│   ├── 03_feature_engineering.ipynb
│   └── 04_model_prototyping.ipynb
│
├── scripts/
│   ├── data_processing.py   # Full data cleaning pipeline
│   └── train_model.py       # Train and evaluate final models
│
├── src/
│   └── utils.py             # Helper functions
│
├── final_report/
│   └── CS668_Final_Paper.pdf
│
├── requirements.txt         # Project dependencies
└── README.md                # This file
```

---

## 4. Setup & Installation

**Clone the repository:**
```bash
git clone https://github.com/your-username/office-apocalypse-algorithm.git
cd office-apocalypse-algorithm
```

**Create and activate a virtual environment:**
```bash
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate     # On Windows: venv\Scripts\activate
```


**Install dependencies:**
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

**Requirements file structure:**
The `requirements.txt` is organized by category for clarity:

```
# Core Libraries
pandas
numpy
scikit-learn
matplotlib
seaborn
geopandas

# Machine Learning
xgboost
lightgbm
shap

# Visualization & Mapping
folium
mapboxgl

# App/Deployment
streamlit

# Notebook Environment
jupyterlab
notebook

# Data Acquisition
beautifulsoup4
requests
```

**Run the analysis notebooks:**
All workflows are documented in the `/notebooks` folder.

---

## 5. Team Members
| Name                    | Role                          |
|-------------------------|-------------------------------|
| **Ibrahim Denis Fofanah** |  |
| **Bright Arowny Zaman**   |                      |
| **Jeevan Hemanth Yendluri** |                  |
|

Commit message:

Add .gitignore for large datasets and update README with Google Drive link

README.md, after:

---

## 6. Large Dataset Access

Due to GitHub's file size limits, large raw datasets are not included in this repository. To use the main dataset for this project, please download it from Google Drive:

**[Download ACRIS_-_Real_Property_Legals_20250915.csv (Google Drive)](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1B73K15zu3-OmoG_qy7XGhY1i-uq7HBeQ/view?usp=sharing)**

After downloading, place the file in the `data/raw/` directory.

> **Note:** All large CSV files in `data/raw/` are excluded from version control via `.gitignore`.
# The "Office Apocalypse" Algorithm: Predicting Commercial Real Estate Vacancy Risk in NYC

## 1. Project Overview
This repository contains the complete codebase and documentation for the **"Office Apocalypse" Algorithm**, a capstone project for the **CS668 Analytics course at Pace University**.

The goal is to develop a **machine learning model** to predict long-term vacancy risk for commercial office buildings in **New York City**, leveraging a diverse set of **public and alternative datasets**.

---

## 2. Problem Statement
The **COVID-19 pandemic** has fundamentally altered workplace culture, popularizing remote and hybrid models that reduce demand for traditional office space.

This shift threatens to create a **commercial vacancy crisis** in NYC, impacting:
- **Property values & tax revenue**
- **Small business viability**
- **Neighborhood vitality**

This project aims to create a **predictive tool** to identify which properties are most at risk of prolonged vacancy (≥12 months), providing **actionable insights** for:
- City planners → conversion and zoning strategies
- Investors & developers → early detection of distressed assets
- Small businesses → anticipating changes in foot traffic

---

## 3. Repository Structure
```
office-apocalypse-algorithm/
├── data/
│   ├── raw/                # Raw, immutable datasets
│   └── processed/          # Cleaned, feature-engineered datasets
│
├── notebooks/
│   ├── 01_data_acquisition.ipynb
│   ├── 02_exploratory_data_analysis.ipynb
│   ├── 03_feature_engineering.ipynb
│   └── 04_model_prototyping.ipynb
│
├── scripts/
│   ├── data_processing.py   # Full data cleaning pipeline
│   └── train_model.py       # Train and evaluate final models
│
├── src/
│   └── utils.py             # Helper functions
│
├── final_report/
│   └── CS668_Final_Paper.pdf
│
├── requirements.txt         # Project dependencies
└── README.md                # This file
```

---

## 4. Setup & Installation

**Clone the repository:**
```bash
git clone https://github.com/your-username/office-apocalypse-algorithm.git
cd office-apocalypse-algorithm
```

**Create and activate a virtual environment:**
```bash
python -m venv venv
source venv/bin/activate     # On Windows: venv\Scripts\activate
```


**Install dependencies:**
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

**Requirements file structure:**
The `requirements.txt` is organized by category for clarity:

```
# Core Libraries
pandas
numpy
scikit-learn
matplotlib
seaborn
geopandas

# Machine Learning
xgboost
lightgbm
shap

# Visualization & Mapping
folium
mapboxgl

# App/Deployment
streamlit

# Notebook Environment
jupyterlab
notebook

# Data Acquisition
beautifulsoup4
requests
```

**Run the analysis notebooks:**
All workflows are documented in the `/notebooks` folder.

---

## 5. Team Members
| Name                    | Role                          |
|-------------------------|-------------------------------|
| **Ibrahim Denis Fofanah** |  |
| **Bright Arowny Zaman**   |                      |
| **Jeevan Hemanth Yendluri** |                  |
|
